---
layout: single
title:  "2020 Content Roundup"
---

## Books

###### *Atomic Habits* by James Clear
Although I'd heard many of the ideas from this book before, reading it in full gave me a new level of clarity on how habits are formed and maintained. I've already found the advice from this book hugely valuable on different levels in developing my habits for reading, running, and studying, and look forward to applying it to other areas in the future.

###### *The Courage To Be Disliked* by  Ichiro Kishimi and Fumitake Koga

This book genuinely changed the way I view interpersonal relationships and personal motivations, and gave me a whole new way to think about how and why we express emotions to others. I really think that the ideas in this book have made a non-zero contribution to my ability to understand and empathise with others, though I only read it fairly recently so will need a while longer before I can properly reflect on whether it has changed me as a person.
It's written as a Socratic dialogue of sorts between a Youth and a Philosopher, which at first I found a little jarring, but quickly became one of the book's strongest features.

###### *The Silmarillion* by J. R. R. Tolkien

###### *Deep Work* by Cal Newport

## Creators

###### Ali Abdaal ([YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/aliabdaal) channel and [Not Overthinking](https://notoverthinking.com/) podcast)

The discovery of Ali's content on YouTube in the latter half of 2020 was a real game changer for me. For the most part, his worldview aligns quite well with my own, as such I've found that a lot of his tips and advice have been things that I could readily incorporate into my life to improve it in various ways.

In the last few months, I feel that I have become more organised, more sociable, and more confident, and more productive, particularly with respect to how I spend my free time. Ali's content has contributed significantly to all of these, by making me think deeply about aspects of my life and my self that I otherwise might not have thought about at all.

###### Ben Parkes ([YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/benparkes))

I discovered Ben Parkes in early 2019, shortly after I started running regularly again, and his videos have been a source of both motivation and valuable information about running ever since. This year, he broke his ankle – as you can imagine, devastating for a serious runner – but rather than being deterred, worked harder than ever to get himself back up to full strength as quickly and safely as possible. Having struggled a fair bit with persistent (although much smaller) injury this year, Ben's content was brilliant as ever to follow along with.

###### Peter McKinnon ([YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/petermckinnon))

In the span of just a few videos, Peter McKinnon more or less convinced me that I wanted to start out with photography. His videos quickly taught me a lot about both photography and editing, eventually prompting me to buy a small mirrorless camera and start messing around with it. I've thoroughly enjoyed exploring town on photo walks, thinking about out how to get the best shots, and then coming home to mess around with editing my photos. There's still plenty of improvement to be done, but I'm keen to carry on learning.

## Movies and TV

This was actually a fairly light year for me in movies and TV. For obvious reasons, I didn't go to the cinema nearly as much as usual this year, and didn't watch many new shows either. From what I did watch, there were a few that really stood out.

###### *Tenet*

As both a Christopher Nolan enthusiast and a physics nerd, this was easily the movie I was most looking forward to this year, and it didn't disappoint. The central idea of temporal inversion was taken to a lot of interesting places throughout the film, and much like with *Interstellar*, it was clear that Nolan had consulted with physicists to ensure that the ideas were coherent and sensible. The movie's aesthetic was great, many of the action sequences were truly mind-blowing, and I appreciated that the audience's hand wasn't held too tightly through the complexities of the plot. I saw Tenet twice in cinemas, enjoyed it even more on second viewing, and expect it'll have excellent rewatch value for years to come.

###### *The Boys*

I was a little late to the party here, but this was one of those few shows that I was utterly hooked on about 10 minutes into the first episode. As a fan of superhero movies generally, this show is a refreshing new angle on the genre. It's consistently fast-paced, has loads of distinctive characters whose interactions are consistently a joy to watch, and pulls absolutely no punches with its dark twists and relentless violence. Can't wait for season 3 (hopefully) in 2021.

###### *Brooklyn Nine-Nine*

This one's been a favourite of mine for a few years now, but deserved a spot on this list anyway for how much I've enjoyed it this year. Its seventh season, which came out in February, was as fantastic as any of the previous ones, continuing to add new depth to its core characters while providing a great balance of lighthearted comedy and poignant social commentary. Always great to see a show that's run for this long continuing to provide some of its best episodes with each new season.

## Gaming

###### *DOOM Eternal*

This game is an absolute tour de force in game design. The combat system is brilliant, with a high skill ceiling that makes it ever more rewarding to rip and tear through hordes of demons as you master the tools at your disposal.
The campaign takes no more than 15 hours to complete, yet I racked up over 150 hours in it and loved every minute. I often enjoy tackling games on high difficulty settings, but DOOM Eternal was the first game for which I'd ever felt tempted to tackle a permadeath mode (a difficulty level called "Ultra Nightmare", in which you have to make it through the entire campaign on the hardest settings *without dying once*). The journey to completing the game on Ultra Nightmare was a genuinely great experience, which pushed me towards mastery of the combat mechanics without feeling at all like a repetitive grind.  

###### *Apex Legends*

I've done a decent amount of gaming over the years, but there aren't many games I've crossed more than 500 hours on, let alone in the span of only about a year playing them. The in-game communication system is a cut above any other online multiplayer I've experienced, and really lent itself to tactical play-styles that kept the game feeling fresh even after hundreds of hours in game.
